My name is Aaron Williams. I'm a senior data scientist at the Urban Institute. I make fake
data for a living. In some scientific circles this would be a huge scandal, but for me it's
an opportunity to further science. Administrative data, these are data that are collected for
reasons entirely other than research, like administering the unemployment insurance system
or enforcing the tax code, are incredibly useful for research, but understandably have
huge confidentiality concerns. I work at the Urban Institute. We're a collection of economists,
sociologists, criminologists, urban planners, and data scientists committed to improving
the world through social and economic policy research. We would do a lot to access administrative
data, and we do do a lot to access administrative data, but we understand there's a fundamental
tension between accessing these data and the confidentiality of the data. That's why
at the Urban Institute we've been working with the IRS to create fully synthetic tax
data. Synthetic data are fake data that have the statistical properties of confidential
data and could be used for certain types of valid analyses, but have much lower confidentiality
concerns because the data are fake. You can think of this as deep fakes for tax research.
In this talk, I'm going to try and make the case that administrative data are very useful,
but are difficult to access. I'm going to share how we're working with the IRS to safely
expand access to administrative data for research, and I'm also going to talk about an R package
that we're developing that makes it easier to synthesize data. Administrative data are
useful, and I'll give you two examples. The first example comes from March of 2020. It
was a scary time when there was a health crisis and an economic crisis unfolding at
the same time. One issue, though, is that a lot of our indicators for the labor market
are backward-looking, and so there's one indicator, one number that came from administrative data
that I think painted an excellent picture of the labor market. Many people had never
heard of it, but it ended up in a dramatic data visualization on the cover of the New
York Times. This is initial weekly unemployment insurance claims. If you look at the bottom
left, that starts in 2000, and it bounces about from 2000 to 2020, and then there's
this black swan event that just shows how scary of a time it was in our labor market.
I'll give you another example. In 2013, Raj Chetty, Emanuel Saez, and co-authors released
groundbreaking research about intergenerational mobility in the United States using data from
40 million anonymized tax records. This was really big research that deals with how Americans
see themselves. We have that desire for our children to be better off than ourselves.
One of the things that they found is that place matters quite a bit. For example, the
probability that a child reaches the top quintile of the national income distribution, starting
from a family in the bottom quintile, is 4.4% in Charlotte, North Carolina, but 12.9% in
San Jose, California. I think I said North Carolina, San Jose, California. It's a really
big deal. But some people say that this research never should have happened. In a traditional
model with an agency like the IRS, you do correspondence research. You have to get your
analysis plan approved. You may never actually see the data. You send off your code. They
run it on the data. They review the results and the like. What Saez and Chetty did was
radical and different. They actually became employees of the IRS. They had to go through
an extensive background check, have their fingerprints taken, go through lots of training,
have all their results reviewed. I've been through this process. Let me tell you, it's
not pleasant at all. The question is, how can we get this understanding,
this value, this meaning from administrative data without all this inconvenience, all while
protecting confidentiality? That's why we're working with synthetic data. If we can create
fake data that match the statistical properties of the confidential data, ways of safely validating
the results from the synthetic data against the confidential data, then we can conveniently
unlock a lot of this potential. We've worked with the IRS to create two kind
of one-and-a-half data sets. The second one is still a bit of a work in progress. The
first one is called the Supplemental SIN PUF, PUF for Public Use File. It's a collection
of information that the IRS has about individuals who have not filed taxes and do not have an
obligation to file taxes. It's a novel data set that's going to be very helpful for understanding
the very low parts of the income distribution. The tax economists that I work with are pretty
excited about it. Now, you may be asking yourself, the IRS,
what are all these non-filers doing in here? What about information that's gathered at
places that maybe have one of these out in front of them? That's the second file that
we're creating. It's called the SIN PUF, and it's representative of all taxpayers in the
United States. Now, the first file that I mentioned had about
20 variables. This file has more than 200 variables, hundreds of thousands of observations,
and it comes from a complex survey with 25 different strata.
Let's consider a much simpler example for now where we have four variables and two observations.
That's our confidential data set. The setup of what we're trying to do is create a new
data set that has the exact same record layout. We're going to employ a sequential approach
to create this data set. The first thing we'll do is we'll sample sex with replacement. Then
we'll create a predictive model to predict age, conditional on sex. Then we'll create
a predictive model to predict wages, conditional on sex and age. Finally, a predictive model
to predict taxes, conditional on sex, age, and wages.
A lot of predictive models, and this is where I get to express my gratitude for Tidy Models
and all the people who have worked on this. We heard some great things about it this morning.
Tidy Models is a comprehensive framework for doing predictive modeling in R, and we use
it extensively. In particular, we use Parsnip quite a bit, which is an interface to different
machine learning and predictive models, and Recipes, which is a really powerful package
for feature and target engineering. Now, in the example that we're working on,
we need to do three predictive models. I gave you another example where we need to
do more than 200 predictive models. So we could imagine having an R script where it's
model one, predict, model two, predict, model three, predict. But if you're going to go
all the way to 200 variables, that's going to become a real pain really quickly.
So what Tidy Synthesis allows us to do is actually specify a whole sequence of predictive
models for generating synthetic data. It also allows us to do a few things very specific
to data synthesis. One is it allows us to add additional noise to predicted values for
extra confidentiality protection. It allows us to specify constraints in the data, things
like individual income can't exceed family income or interest income can't exceed your
personal income. It also allows us to predict from our models in different ways, and I'll
talk about that more in a second. So simply put, Tidy Synthesis, the goal is all the power
of Tidy models for data synthesis concisely with a few special tools.
So what does this actually look like? I'm going to show you how we're going to synthesize
a data set today. I'm not going to synthesize unemployment insurance data. To the relief
of many of you, I'm not going to synthesize tax data. We could imagine synthesizing electronic
health records, or maybe we're a business and we're interested in unlocking information
from our customer data without sacrificing the confidentiality of any individual in our
data. But I'm not going to do that either. No, instead, we're going to synthesize penguins
data because penguins deserve privacy, too. So we're going to synthesize the Palmer penguins
data set. We already had a good introduction to this earlier. Right, so we have information
about species and island and sex and these numeric measures, measurements of the different
penguins, and we're really going to focus on these numeric variables, and our goal is
to create synthetic data that match the layout of that confidential data. So we can start
asking ourselves some questions of what this should look like. If you have 200 variables,
what order should we use? Well, tidy synthesis has a function that employs different heuristics
that you can use to determine synthesis order. In this case, I'm going to use my extensive
knowledge of penguins, which is absolutely none, to determine that bill length is a very
important variable, and then we're going to synthesize the remaining variables in order
from most correlated with bill length to least correlated. Once we create this visit
sequence object, it's going to be reused in a lot of other functions. What kind of algorithm
should we use for our predictive models? In this case, we're going to use a regression
tree, and this is where Parsnip really shines in tidy synthesis. So we just specify a regression
tree implemented with the R part engine. Now we need to specify that for all of our different
models, and this is where we're really saving on all that R code. In this case, we just
specify that we want to use the R part mod for every single variable. There's three ways
to specify this. The first one is like this, where we use the same model for all variables.
Alternatively, we can specify a default and then override it for specific variables, or
we can specify a different model for every single variable. What types of feature or
target engineering should we use? In this case, this is where recipes really shines
in tidy synthesis. We can specify any set of steps in recipes for our synthesis. In
this case, we're not going to use any feature or target engineering. We're just going to
use this helper function, construct recipes, to basically construct a series of formula.
Finally, how are we actually going to come up with synthetic data from our models? Now,
if you just use the predict function, oftentimes you get a conditional mean or a conditional
median. This actually makes for really bad synthetic data, because the data sets that
you're creating don't have adequate sample variance, right? You don't have enough variation
in the resulting data. So in this case, we're going to use a function called sample R part.
If you're familiar with regression trees, you navigate to your final node, and oftentimes
you might take the mean of that node. Instead, we're going to sample from that final node
to sort of get this prediction distribution. So I just walked you through two of the functions.
There's a lot of other functions and objects in tidy synthesis that can control the synthesis
process. There's noise for adding additional noise to predicted values. There's constraints
for elegantly enforcing constraints in the data. And there's replicates if we actually
want to synthesize more than one data set, which can be handled in parallel.
Tidy models is lazy, right? You create a bunch of objects, but a lot of the computation doesn't
actually happen until you use a tune function or a fit function. And tidy synthesis is the
exact same way. So much like you have a workflow in tidy models, we have a pre-synth object
where we bring together everything, and then the actual hard work starts when you run the
synthesize function. This is where you go check Twitter, get your cup of coffee. If
you have 200 variables, maybe let it run overnight.
So I promised that we were going to synthesize some penguins data, and I have a quick video
to show this off. In the right, you'll notice we have about 300 observations. If we wrote
all this code out, it might be a few hundred lines of code, but in this case, it's only
about 70 lines of code. I'm going to highlight everything and click run here in a second,
and you'll see that it quickly gets down to the synthesize function.
Now if you've worked with the Palmer penguins data set before, I want you to close your
eyes and imagine what that data set looks like. This will take about 10 to 12 seconds
to run. And now open your eyes. Unless you have it perfectly memorized, hopefully this
looks like what you were seeing in your mind, right? This looks like the penguins data set,
but it's entirely made up. It's entirely fake. So we have synthetic data. We're done, right?
If this is all I had to do, I'd be very happy. I'd spend lots of time by the pool with a
drink and, you know, with the little umbrellas and everything, relaxing. But in reality,
I spend most of my day saying, have we done a good enough job?
We can imagine looking at this in a few different ways. I mean, on the surface, it looks like
the penguins data set. We can look at the univariate distributions for the four numeric
variables. Here I have density plots for them, where the synthetic data are in blue and the
confidential data are in yellow. And you see that we pretty closely recreate the univariate
distributions for each of them. And in fact, we only have 300 observations. So any differences
here could just be because of sampling error. We can also look at some bivariate relationships.
Here I have the relationship between flipper length and bill length, flipper length and
bill depth, and flipper length and body mass. Again, the synthetic data are in blue and
the confidential data are in yellow. And in all three cases, I think we do a pretty good
job of recreating the data. And in fact, if you fit regression lines, which I've done
here, they look almost identical.
But maybe we're not satisfied. Maybe we want to specify a new synthesis and start all over
again. The good news is we're not starting from the beginning. Just like how in tidy
models you can reuse objects sort of over and over and over again, here we can reuse
all of our objects from earlier, add some information about adding noise to our predicted
values, add some constraints, and synthesize.
So just as a recap, administrative data are useful but difficult to access. And I think
there's a huge potential to understand more about our world if we can make it easier to
access those data.
As a proof of concept, we've created two fully synthetic data sets with the IRS. And we've
built this package called TidySynthesis so that other agencies, nonprofits, and businesses
can implement these methods without having to write, you know, thousands of lines of
code.
Now, the data privacy community, the synthetic data community are pretty small. And especially
they don't have that many statisticians or data scientists. So if this is something that
gets you excited, if you're interested in joining the raft of privacy penguins, please
don't hesitate to reach out to me after this talk here in person, on Twitter at AWUnderground
or on GitHub. Maybe this could be you. Thank you.